## Attosecond science - lecture notes

**Ferenc Krausz** - Max Planck institute for Quantum Optics. Alma mater: University of Vienna

## The smallest dimension in time

Opportunity for better healthcare hides in advanced phsyical technologies:
- electrical impulse modeling
- molecular data acquisiton

Transferring from easing symptoms to preventing diseases.

## Fully controlled wave of visible light
Attosecond metrology - controlling and measuring light.

- Optical field-induced electron tunelling. 
$E_{crit} = \frac{\Delta_g}{ea} ~ 2 \frac{V}{A}$<br/>
$A$ (dot)

- Attosecond spectroscopy w/o pauses using tunelling (the second generation).
It involves overcoming the valence band with the energy of the light wave.

## Oscillating light field measurement

IR-UV light attosecond probing:
- mesauring the material response - electric field displacement generated by the transmitted light wave (Maxwell Equations).
- Material polarization and a wave function differential equation

Measuring occurs when **overcoming the valence band** into the **conduction band** with the energy of the light wave. Different materials have different overcoming properties - quartz: 6x photon energy, silicon: 2x photon energy.

Energy has to dissipate in a specific time to allow generation of another standalone pulse. There is a fundamental (band-structure) limit of classical signal processing. (Where current is linear to the energy) - up to $1PHz$.

Generation of attosecond pulses is therefore an viable opportunity to outperform Moore's Law (doubling CPU clock speed).

Polarization created after material response due to inner-material vibrations stays, therefore allowing to diagnose >100 000 different molecules with biomarkers, eventually leading to the disease diagnose and prevention.

## New Technology - Field-resolved IR spectroscopy

Treat blood as measured material and generate a response of a molecular vibration. Response is an electric-field molecular fingerprint - can be directly measured via attosecond spectroscopy.

Temporal confinement of the excitation allows a background-free signal detection.

Classical Frequency-resolved IR spectroscopy involves constantly flashing IR waves on an object, resulting in a noise. It allows to measure a concentration $<8ug/ml$. The field-resolved IR spectroscopy allows measuring a concentration $<100ng / ml$.

Large molecules, like protein, are not yet ready to be processed by the new technology (signal decay). 

## Lung cancer research

The idea of a window of darkness - impossible to obtain by the classical frequency spectroscopy.

After the excitation peak there emerges a window of darknes and the visible differences between ill and healthy molecular fingerprints are shown.

Spectroscopic markers - differences in a molecular fingerprint with respect to the healthy reference. They can be used to determine the disease existence and spread. Stage I-IV are different, which IV showing a severe metastasis - a non-preventable death sentence.

Binary classification - false/true positive AUC (area under curve) comparison - diagnosis efficiency classification method.

Establishing such measurement population-wide will allow to further increase the efficiency of the diagnosis.
By mapping the general model to a specific person one may lower the noise level by the factor of `10^3`. 

## Questions

- Time to implement the idea for the general population = +10 yrs (discourse between the medical and physical communities). However the timespan of a few years will suffice the technical requirements. The rest is convincing.

## Post-Lecture

International Max Planck Partner Group - Wroclaw University of Technology - Generating a mid IR attosecond pulse at our university.

